README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# virtualNicheR <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="200" />

To evaluate how well species-environment models perform in different
situations, modellers need the ability to generate virtual niches that
have known properties. These virtual niches can then form the basis of
virtual ecology experiments that can test how well different models
perform under different conditions.

`virtualNicheR` is an `R` package that is unique in that it provides an
integrated framework that is needed to generate both [fundamental and
realised niches](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_niche). We
envisage that the ability to generate integrated fundamental and
realised virtual niches will allow modellers to improve the virtual
ecology experiments that have been advocated for evaluating
species-environment relationship models.

The fundamental niches are defined as [multivariate normal
distributions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multivariate_normal_distribution),
and the realised niches are created by defining the positive and
negative interactions amongst a community of fundamental niches. A full
description of the `virtualNicheR` package, including connections to
niche theory and an explanation of the underlying mathematics, can be
found in the associated software paper \[link to be included once
published\].

## Citation

If you use `virtualNicheR` in your research we would be very grateful if
you could please cite the software using the following software paper:

Etherington TR, Omondiagbe, OP (2019) virtualNicheR: creating virtual
fundamental and realised niches \[details to be updated once published\]

## Community guidelines

We very much welcome input from others\! If you find a bug, need some
help, or can think of some extra functionality that would be useful,
please raise an
[issue](https://github.com/manaakiwhenua/virtualNicheR/issues). Better
still, please feel free to fork the project and raise a pull request if
you think and can fix a bug, clarify the documentation, or improve the
functionality yourself.

## Installation

You can install `virtualNicheR` from GitHub with:

``` r
# install.packages("githubinstall")
githubinstall::githubinstall("manaakiwhenua/virtualNicheR")

# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("manaakiwhenua/virtualNicheR")
```

## Dependencies

`virtualNicheR` is not dependant on any additional packages, and was
developed using `R` version 3.5.1.

## Quick Examples

In `virtualNicheR` the **fundamental niche** of a virtual species *S* is
defined by:

  - λ<sub>*max*</sub>, the species’ maximum finite rate of increase at
    the fundamental niche optimum,
  - **μ**, a vector of means that gives the optimum location of the
    niche in each dimension, and
  - **Σ**, a variance-covariance matrix that gives the size and
    orientation of the niche in each dimension.

By generating a systematic grid of coordinates in niche space, the niche
can be easily visualised.

``` r
library(virtualNicheR)

# Create coordinates across niche space
niche.XY = niche.grid.coords(mins=c(15,0), maxs=c(35,200), nCoords=121)

# Define a species as a function of the maximum finite rate of increase,
# a means vector, and covariance matrix
lambdaMax = 2.5
meansVector = matrix(c(25, 100))
covarMatrix = matrix(data=c(9, 60,
                            60, 625), nrow=2, ncol=2, byrow = TRUE)
species = list(lambdaMax, meansVector, covarMatrix)

# Calculate the fundamental niche
fundNiche = fund.niche(niche.XY, species)

# Plot the fundamental niche
fundNicheMatrix = matrix(fundNiche, nrow=length(unique(niche.XY[,1])))
nContour = 10
filled.contour(unique(niche.XY[,1]), unique(niche.XY[,2]), fundNicheMatrix,
               levels = seq(0, lambdaMax, lambdaMax/nContour),
               col=colorRampPalette(c("gold", "firebrick"))(nContour),
               xlab=expression(paste("Temperature (", degree, "C)")),
               ylab="Rainfall (mm)",
               main ="Fundamental niche",
               key.title = title(main = expression(lambda)))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-fund-niche-example-1.png" width="100%" />

Given maps of environmental data, the fundamental niche can also be
mapped in geographic space to create a **potential niche**.

``` r
# Map the potential niche given maps of environmental variables
# Convert matrices of variables into columns
temp1D = matrix(temperatureMap, ncol=1)
rain1D = matrix(rainfallMap, ncol=1)
data.XY = cbind(temp1D, rain1D)
# Calculate the potential niche and form back in a 2D map
poteNiche = fund.niche(data.XY, species)
poteNiche2D = matrix(poteNiche, ncol=100)
filled.contour(z=poteNiche2D,
              levels = seq(0, lambdaMax, lambdaMax/nContour),
              col=colorRampPalette(c("gold", "firebrick"))(nContour),
              asp=1, plot.axes = {}, frame.plot=FALSE,
              main ="Map of the potential niche",
              key.title = title(main = expression(lambda)))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-pote-niche-example-1.png" width="100%" />

Having created fundamental niches for several species, by defining a
matrix that quantifies the interactions (competition, predation,
commensalism, amensalism, or mutualism) between species, it is also
possible to calculate a **realised niche** that accounts for positive
and negative affects of species interactions.

``` r
# Define the community
species1 = list(2.5, matrix(c(25, 100)), matrix(data=c(9, 60,
                                                       60, 625), nrow=2, ncol=2, byrow=TRUE))
species2 = list(5.0, matrix(c(28, 110)), matrix(data=c(4, -20, 
                                                      -20, 500), nrow=2, ncol=2, byrow=TRUE))
species3 = list(3.0, matrix(c(25, 80)), matrix(data=c(4, 0,
                                                      0, 150), nrow=2, ncol=2, byrow=TRUE))
community = list(species1, species2, species3)

# Define the interactions
interactions = matrix(data=c(0.0, 0.2,-0.4,
                            -1.0, 0.0,-1.0,
                            -0.6, 0.3, 0.0), nrow=3, ncol=3,byrow = TRUE)

# Calculate the realised niche values
niche.XY = niche.grid.coords(mins=c(15,0), maxs=c(35,200), nCoords=121)
realNiche = real.niche(niche.XY, community, interactions)

# Plot the realised niche for species 1
realNiche1 = matrix(realNiche[,1], nrow=length(unique(niche.XY[,1])))
nContour = 10
filled.contour(unique(niche.XY[,1]), unique(niche.XY[,2]), realNiche1,
               levels = seq(0, 5, 5/nContour),
               col=colorRampPalette(c("gold", "firebrick"))(nContour),
               xlab=expression(paste("Temperature (", degree, "C)")),
               ylab="Rainfall (mm)",
               main ="Realised niche",
               key.title = title(main = expression(lambda)))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-real-niche-example-1.png" width="100%" />

Commit message:

Added citation details for JOSS paper

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

[![DOI](https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.01661/status.svg)](https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01661)

# virtualNicheR <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="200" />

To evaluate how well species-environment models perform in different
situations, modellers need the ability to generate virtual niches that
have known properties. These virtual niches can then form the basis of
virtual ecology experiments that can test how well different models
perform under different conditions.

`virtualNicheR` is an `R` package that is unique in that it provides an
integrated framework that is needed to generate both [fundamental and
realised niches](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_niche). We
envisage that the ability to generate integrated fundamental and
realised virtual niches will allow modellers to improve the virtual
ecology experiments that have been advocated for evaluating
species-environment relationship models.

The fundamental niches are defined as [multivariate normal
distributions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multivariate_normal_distribution),
and the realised niches are created by defining the positive and
negative interactions amongst a community of fundamental niches. A full
description of the `virtualNicheR` package, including connections to
niche theory and an explanation of the underlying mathematics, can be
found in the associated [software
paper](https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.01661).

## Citation

If you use `virtualNicheR` in your research we would be very grateful if
you could please cite the software using the following software paper:

[Etherington TR, Omondiagbe OP (2019) virtualNicheR: generating virtual
fundamental and realised niches for use in virtual ecology experiments.
Journal of Open Source
Software 4:1661](https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.01661)

## Community guidelines

We very much welcome input from others\! If you find a bug, need some
help, or can think of some extra functionality that would be useful,
please raise an
[issue](https://github.com/manaakiwhenua/virtualNicheR/issues). Better
still, please feel free to fork the project and raise a pull request if
you think and can fix a bug, clarify the documentation, or improve the
functionality yourself.

## Installation

You can install `virtualNicheR` from GitHub with:

``` r
# install.packages("githubinstall")
githubinstall::githubinstall("manaakiwhenua/virtualNicheR")

# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("manaakiwhenua/virtualNicheR")
```

## Dependencies

`virtualNicheR` is not dependant on any additional packages, and was
developed using `R` version 3.5.1.

## Quick Examples

In `virtualNicheR` the **fundamental niche** of a virtual species *S* is
defined by:

  - λ<sub>*max*</sub>, the species’ maximum finite rate of increase at
    the fundamental niche optimum,
  - **μ**, a vector of means that gives the optimum location of the
    niche in each dimension, and
  - **Σ**, a variance-covariance matrix that gives the size and
    orientation of the niche in each dimension.

By generating a systematic grid of coordinates in niche space, the niche
can be easily visualised.

``` r
library(virtualNicheR)

# Create coordinates across niche space
niche.XY = niche.grid.coords(mins=c(15,0), maxs=c(35,200), nCoords=121)

# Define a species as a function of the maximum finite rate of increase,
# a means vector, and covariance matrix
lambdaMax = 2.5
meansVector = matrix(c(25, 100))
covarMatrix = matrix(data=c(9, 60,
                            60, 625), nrow=2, ncol=2, byrow = TRUE)
species = list(lambdaMax, meansVector, covarMatrix)

# Calculate the fundamental niche
fundNiche = fund.niche(niche.XY, species)

# Plot the fundamental niche
fundNicheMatrix = matrix(fundNiche, nrow=length(unique(niche.XY[,1])))
nContour = 10
filled.contour(unique(niche.XY[,1]), unique(niche.XY[,2]), fundNicheMatrix,
               levels = seq(0, lambdaMax, lambdaMax/nContour),
               col=colorRampPalette(c("gold", "firebrick"))(nContour),
               xlab=expression(paste("Temperature (", degree, "C)")),
               ylab="Rainfall (mm)",
               main ="Fundamental niche",
               key.title = title(main = expression(lambda)))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-fund-niche-example-1.png" width="100%" />

Given maps of environmental data, the fundamental niche can also be
mapped in geographic space to create a **potential niche**.

``` r
# Map the potential niche given maps of environmental variables
# Convert matrices of variables into columns
temp1D = matrix(temperatureMap, ncol=1)
rain1D = matrix(rainfallMap, ncol=1)
data.XY = cbind(temp1D, rain1D)
# Calculate the potential niche and form back in a 2D map
poteNiche = fund.niche(data.XY, species)
poteNiche2D = matrix(poteNiche, ncol=100)
filled.contour(z=poteNiche2D,
              levels = seq(0, lambdaMax, lambdaMax/nContour),
              col=colorRampPalette(c("gold", "firebrick"))(nContour),
              asp=1, plot.axes = {}, frame.plot=FALSE,
              main ="Map of the potential niche",
              key.title = title(main = expression(lambda)))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-pote-niche-example-1.png" width="100%" />

Having created fundamental niches for several species, by defining a
matrix that quantifies the interactions (competition, predation,
commensalism, amensalism, or mutualism) between species, it is also
possible to calculate a **realised niche** that accounts for positive
and negative affects of species interactions.

``` r
# Define the community
species1 = list(2.5, matrix(c(25, 100)), matrix(data=c(9, 60,
                                                       60, 625), nrow=2, ncol=2, byrow=TRUE))
species2 = list(5.0, matrix(c(28, 110)), matrix(data=c(4, -20, 
                                                      -20, 500), nrow=2, ncol=2, byrow=TRUE))
species3 = list(3.0, matrix(c(25, 80)), matrix(data=c(4, 0,
                                                      0, 150), nrow=2, ncol=2, byrow=TRUE))
community = list(species1, species2, species3)

# Define the interactions
interactions = matrix(data=c(0.0, 0.2,-0.4,
                            -1.0, 0.0,-1.0,
                            -0.6, 0.3, 0.0), nrow=3, ncol=3,byrow = TRUE)

# Calculate the realised niche values
niche.XY = niche.grid.coords(mins=c(15,0), maxs=c(35,200), nCoords=121)
realNiche = real.niche(niche.XY, community, interactions)

# Plot the realised niche for species 1
realNiche1 = matrix(realNiche[,1], nrow=length(unique(niche.XY[,1])))
nContour = 10
filled.contour(unique(niche.XY[,1]), unique(niche.XY[,2]), realNiche1,
               levels = seq(0, 5, 5/nContour),
               col=colorRampPalette(c("gold", "firebrick"))(nContour),
               xlab=expression(paste("Temperature (", degree, "C)")),
               ylab="Rainfall (mm)",
               main ="Realised niche",
               key.title = title(main = expression(lambda)))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-real-niche-example-1.png" width="100%" />
